Final Project
Representation Learning for Physical Simulations
Spring 2026
1. Introduction
For the final project, you will bridge the gap between physical numerical simulations and modern self-supervised machine learning. You will be using the active_matter subset from The Well (a large-scale dataset of physical simulations) to train robust representations of complex physical dynamics. While we provide resources related to JEPA (Joint-Embedding Predictive Architectures) as a strong baseline, you are free to use any representation learning method (e.g., Masked Autoencoders, Contrastive Learning, etc.).
About the active_matter Dataset:
This dataset models the dynamics of biological active matter (e.g., rod-like active particles immersed in a fluid). It captures complex physical phenomena such as the transition from an isotropic to a nematic state and the transfer of energy between scales.
Scale: Approximately 52 GB in total, making it the most accessible dataset in The Well.
Dimensions: Each sample consists of 16 frames (time steps), with a spatial resolution of 224x224, and 11 physical channels. (Note: The raw simulations are 81 time-steps of 256x256, but they are processed into 224x224 windows for training).
Fields: The 11 channels comprise a concentration scalar field, a velocity vector field, an orientation tensor field, and a strain-rate tensor field.
Splits: The dataset is pre-divided into 8,750 training samples, 1,200 validation samples, and 1,300 test samples.
Physical Parameters (Labels): Each simulation trajectory is governed by two underlying physical constants: $\alpha$ (active dipole strength, 5 discrete values) and $\zeta$ (steric alignment, 9 discrete values). There are 45 unique parameter combinations in total.
A Helpful Perspective: You can think of this task as being highly analogous to video representation learning. Just as a video is a sequence of 2D images (frames) with 3 RGB channels evolving over time, the active_matter physical simulation is a sequence of spatial grids with 11 physical channels evolving over time. Because of this structural similarity, techniques and architectures designed for video understanding (like Video JEPA or VideoMAE) can be directly adapted to model these physical systems.
2. Project Resources
EB-JEPA Codebase: An open-source library for learning representations from images and videos. You may use this as a reference or build upon it.
Reference: EB-JEPA GitHub Repository
Baseline Paper & Code: A recent paper providing a baseline approach and context for this type of predictive modeling on physical simulations.
Reference: arXiv:2603.13227 | Baseline GitHub Repository
3. Data Access & Download
The dataset is hosted on HuggingFace. We will be using the active_matter dataset from the HuggingFace repository polymathic-ai/active_matter.
Downloading the Data:
You can download the dataset using the HuggingFace CLI. First, ensure you have the CLI installed in your environment, then run the following command to download the dataset to your desired directory (e.g., /scratch/$NETID/data):
Bash
Note: The dataset is approximately 52 GB. Please ensure you have sufficient storage space in your /scratch directory before downloading.
4. Task Description
Your objective is to design and train a representation learning model to capture the temporal evolution of physical systems using the active_matter dataset.
Specific Steps:
Representation Learning: Train your model using a self-supervised or unsupervised learning objective (e.g., latent prediction, masked reconstruction, contrastive learning) to capture the underlying physical dynamics. You must not use the physical parameter labels ($\alpha$ and $\zeta$) during this stage.
Linear Probing & kNN Regression: Freeze the encoder and evaluate the learned representations. You must evaluate your representations using both a single linear layer and kNN regression to predict the continuous values of $\alpha$ and $\zeta$ (normalized via z-score) using Mean Squared Error (MSE) loss.
Important: You must treat this as a regression task using MSE loss. You are not allowed to treat it as a discrete classification task. Complex regression heads (e.g., MLPs or attentive pooling classifiers) and end-to-end finetuning of the backbone are strictly prohibited for your main evaluation.
5. Computing Resources
All students have access to HPC Cloud Bursting for this course.
Access Method:
Access is provided exclusively through Open OnDemand (OOD): https://ood-burst-001.hpc.nyu.edu/
Note: NYU VPN is required when working off-campus.
From this OOD server, you can launch compute nodes, run Jupyter notebooks, open terminal sessions inside Jupyter notebooks, transfer data from local computers, and submit batch jobs directly from Jupyter notebook terminals.
Slurm Account & Quota:
Account: csci_ga_2572-2026sp
Quota: 300 GPU hours (18,000 minutes) per student, with sufficient CPU time.
Allowed Partitions: * interactive, n2c48m24 (CPU only)
g2-standard-12 (1 L4 GPU), g2-standard-24 (2 L4 GPUs), g2-standard-48 (4 L4 GPUs)
c12m85-a100-1 (1 A100 40GB GPU), c24m170-a100-2 (2 A100 40GB GPUs)
n1s8-t4-1 (1 T4 GPU)
Spot Instance Policy (Important!):
Cloud resources run on Google Cloud spot instances, which may be preempted (shut down) at any time. For more information, see the GCP Spot Instances Documentation.
You must enable checkpoint/restart for your training runs.
Save your checkpoints to your /scratch/$NETID directory.
Add the following directive to all your Slurm scripts so jobs are automatically requeued if instances are preempted:
#SBATCH --requeue
Data Transfer & Environments:
Data Transfer: Use the Torch data transfer nodes: dtn.torch.hpc.nyu.edu. From a cloud instance, copy data using:
Bash
(Requires NYU 2FA).
Environments: Set up Conda environments using Singularity and overlay files.
Instructions: Singularity with Conda
Overlay templates: /share/apps/overlay-fs-ext3
OS images: /share/apps/images
6. Grading
Your project will be evaluated based on the following criteria (Total 100%):
Performance (Linear Probing & kNN): The Mean Squared Error of predicting the normalized physical parameters ($\alpha$ and $\zeta$) on the validation/test set using a frozen encoder. This measures how well your learned representations encode the underlying physical laws. Both linear probing and kNN regression results must be reported.
Scientific Rigor & Analysis: Quality of ablation studies, architectural/methodological novelty, and comparison against an end-to-end supervised baseline. Clear justification of design choices and analysis of representation learning metrics (e.g., checking for representation collapse). We value methodological novelty and rigorous analysis over brute-force hyperparameter tuning.
Reproducibility & Code Quality: Clean, well-documented code for your chosen architecture. Proper use of experiment tracking (e.g., Weights & Biases), clear instructions for running your pipeline, and efficient use of compute resources.
Report Quality: Clarity, writing, figures/tables, related work positioning, limitations/ethics, and explicit statement of contributions.
7. Starter Code
To help you get started, we highly recommend reviewing the Baseline GitHub Repository provided in the Project Resources section. It contains the implementation for the baseline paper.
8. Rules and Restrictions
Training from Scratch: You must train your model from scratch. You are not allowed to load any pretrained weights (e.g., from ImageNet, CLIP, or models pretrained on other physical datasets). The goal is to learn representations from scratch on the provided dataset.
Model Size Limit: The total number of parameters in your model must be strictly fewer than 100 Million parameters. However, do not blindly increase the parameter count. Because this is high-dimensional spatiotemporal (video) data, the computational cost and memory footprint (VRAM) of intermediate activations are extremely high. For context, the baseline JEPA model only uses ~3.3M parameters in total (~2.5M for the encoder and ~0.8M for the predictor) but can still consume nearly 100 GB of VRAM with a batch size of 8.
Data Scope: You may only use the active_matter dataset provided. No external data is allowed.
No Training on Validation/Test Data: You may only use the training split to update model weights. The validation split is strictly for hyperparameter tuning and model selection. The test split must only be used for final evaluation and cannot be used for any form of training, unsupervised updates, or tuning.
Linear Probing and kNN Only: When evaluating your frozen representations, you must evaluate using both a single linear layer and kNN. Complex regression heads (e.g., MLPs, attention pooling) are not allowed for the final evaluation metric.
9. Deliverables & Submission
You are expected to work in teams of 3-4 students. How you divide the work (e.g., data engineering, architecture adaptation, hyperparameter tuning, evaluation) is entirely up to your team. Since each member has access to their own GPU quota, we highly recommend coordinating your compute resources to run distributed hyperparameter sweeps efficiently.
Your final submission should be a single archive (or private repository link) containing:
Final Report (6–8 pages). Detailing your method, experiments, ablations, analysis, compute accounting, limitations/ethics, and references. You must format your report using the ICML 2026 Style Template. It must also include a dedicated "Statement of Contributions" section explicitly outlining what each team member worked on.
Code and Artifacts. Reproducible training and evaluation code; configs; saved backbone weights; logs; script to run evaluation; and an environment file (ENV.md & requirements.txt).
10. Reproducibility Checklist
Before submitting, ensure you have met the following criteria:
Fixed seeds and determinism flags where feasible; record seeds in logs.
Exact data preprocessing and augmentations documented.
Full configuration files checked in; command lines to reproduce results.
Parameter count report (must be < 100M).
Compute accounting: GPUs, hours, peak memory; any mixed precision usage.
Clear separation between representation learning and linear probing stages.
No references to external data, models, or weights in code.
11. FAQ
Can we use CLIP/DINO/VideoMAE pretrained weights?
No. Training from scratch only.
Can we use external unlabeled data?
No.
Can we fine-tune the entire backbone for our main submission?
No. Your core method must be representation learning. You must evaluate using both a single linear layer and kNN on top of a frozen backbone. You may, however, train an end-to-end supervised model strictly to serve as a baseline comparison in your report.
Are we required to train an end-to-end supervised baseline?
It is not mandatory. Comparing your representation learning method against a purely supervised baseline provides insights into the value of your approach.
Are we graded on speed?
Not directly. Report compute fairly; efficiency is appreciated.
How much does the final performance (MSE) affect our grade?
We want you to treat this as a real research project. While strong performance is rewarded, we highly appreciate and reward methodological novelty, rigorous ablation studies, and deep analysis of why a method works or fails.
12. Academic Integrity
Follow the letter and spirit of the rules. Collaborate within your team; do not share code or weights across teams. Cite all external ideas and implementations you reference. Any attempt to train on test set, use pretrained weights, or otherwise circumvent the rules will be considered academic dishonesty and will result in a 0 for the project and a formal report.
